Saving
======

There are a couple of different approaches that can be taken when
writing data to a MongoDB database. Simon provides a few different
methods to perform writes to help expose the full power of each.

Document Replacement
--------------------

The basic way to create or update a document is with the
:meth:`~simon.Model.save` method. It will save the document associated
with the instance to the database. If an update is being performed, the
version of the document in the database will be overwritten by the
version associated with the instance. This is known as document
replacement. Any changes made to the version of the document in the
database that have not been introduced to the instance will be lost.

.. code-block:: python

    user = User(name='Simon')
    user.save()

This can be condensed into one step using the
:meth:`~simon.Model.create` method.

.. code-block:: python

    user = User.create(name='Simon')

:meth:`~simon.Model.save` can also be used to save changes to a
document.

.. code-block:: python

    user.email = 'simon@example.com'
    user.save()

The first of these calls to :meth:`~simon.Model.save` will result in an
``insert``. The second will result in an ``update``. In the ``mongo``
Shell they would be written as:

.. code-block:: javascript

    db.users.insert({name: 'Simon'})

    db.users.update({_id: ObjectId(...)}, {email: 'simon@example.com'})


Atomic Updates
--------------

MongoDB also offers a more powerful way to save changes to documents:
atomic updates. By utilizing atomic updates, you can write selective
changes to portions of a document without replacing the whole thing.
Simon provides several different ways to perform atomic updates.

save_fields
  The :meth:`~simon.Model.save_fields` method will perform an atomic
  update updating only the specified fields.

  .. code-block:: python

    # update only the score field
    user.score = 100
    user.save_fields('score')

  You can also update multiple fields at once.

  .. code-block:: python

    user.score = 200
    user.friends = ['Alvin', 'Theodore']
    user.save_fields(['score', 'friends'])

  In the ``mongo`` Shell these would be:

  .. code-block:: javascript

    db.users.update({_id: ObjectId(...)}, {$set: {score: 100}})

    db.users.update({_id: ObjectId(...)}, {$set: {score: 200, friends: ['Alvin', 'Theodore']}})

update
  The :meth:`~simon.Model.update` method provides a shortcut to the
  behavior offered by :meth:`~simon.Model.save_fields`.

  .. code-block:: python

    user.update(score=100)

    user.update(score=200, friends=['Alvin', 'Theodore'])

increment
  The :meth:`~simon.Model.increment` method provides a way to increment
  the values of the specified fields. If the field does not exist, it
  will be added with the initial value of ``0``.

  When incrementing only one field, only the name of the field needs to
  be given to :meth:`~simon.Model.increment`. A value can also be
  provided if incrementing by any value other than ``1``.

  .. code-block:: python

    user.increment('score')

    user.increment('score', 100)

  :meth:`~simon.Model.increment` can also be used to increment multiple
  fields at once.

  .. code-block:: python

    user.increment(score=100, level=1)

  The equivalent queries in the ``mongo`` Shell would be:

  .. code-block:: javascript

    db.users.update({_id: ObjectId(...)}, {$inc: {score: 1}})

    db.users.update({_id: ObjectId(...)}, {$inc: {score: 100}})

    db.users.update({_id: ObjectId(...)}, {$inc: {score: 100, level: 1}})

remove_fields
  The :meth:`~simon.Model.remove_fields` method will remove the
  specified fields from the document in the database.

  Using it works just like :meth:`~simon.Model.save_fields`.

  .. code-block:: python

    user.remove_fields('level')

    user.remove_fields(['level', 'friends'])

  To execute these same queries in the ``mongo`` Shell:

  .. code-block:: javascript

    db.users.update({_id: ObjectId(...)}, {$unset: {level: 1}})

    db.users.update({_id: ObjectId(...)}, {$unset: {level: 1, friends: 1}})

raw_update
  The :meth:`~simon.Model.raw_update` method allows any update query to
  be specified.

  This method will let you execute any update that can't appropriately
  be expressed through one of the other methods. Just make sure you use
  it with caution as Simon can do little to protect you.

  .. code-block:: python

    user.raw_update({'$set': {'level': 1}, '$inc': {'score': 100}, '$unset': {'friends': 1}})

  This query would be passed through to MongoDB as:

  .. code-block:: javascript

    db.users.update({_id: ObjectId(...)}, {$set: {level: 1}, $inc: {score: 100}, $unset: {friends: 1}})


Write Concern
-------------

Simon ships with write concern enabled for all updates by default. For
an update to be successful, it must be successful or, in the case of a
replica set, it must be successful on the primary server. All of the
methods discussed above as well as :meth:`~simon.Model.delete` and
:meth:`~simon.Model.get_or_create` accept an argument called ``w`` that
can be used to override the default behavior. This can come in the form
of disabling write concern with ``w=0`` or making sure the update is
replicated toa number of secondary servers with ``w=3``. The latter
will only be considered successful if write happens on the primary
server and two secondary servers.

.. code-block:: python

    user = User(name='Simon')
    user.save(w=0)

    user.update(email='simon@example.com', safe=True)

    user.delete(w=2)

A much more detailed explanation of write concern is available in the
`MongoDB Docs`_.

.. _MongoDB Docs: http://docs.mongodb.org/manual/core/write-operations/#write-concern
